Overview of gistemp

gistemp is a software product written in the Python programming language. 
It is a replication of the original GISTEMP, written in fortran and Python.

The concept was developed at NASA/GISS by James Hansen and Sergei Lebedeff.
It was coded in fortran by Sergei, later rewritten and modified by Reto Ruedy.
Jay Glascoe added preliminary parts written in python (Step 1). 
Reto Ruedy added the urban adjustment routines in fortran (Step2).
All this work was done at NASA/GISS.

David Jones' team, Climate Code Foundation, reprogrammed the whole procedure in python, as a product 
of the Clear Climate Code project and the Climate Code Foundation, http://clearclimatecode.org/

Finally, it was modified and upgraded to python3.4 by Avraham Persin at NASA/GISS.

gistemp is a reconstruction of the global historical temperature anomalies, and is described and 
used on the NASA/GISS webpage: https://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/

Broadly the GISTEMP algorithm takes historical temperature data from land-based weather stations 
as input, and combines these data to produce an estimate of temperature change over large regions.
In addition, sea surface temperature data (which has already been processed to some extent) 
can be combined with land station data.

This document provides an overview of the algorithm, and in particular attempts to link the high
level organisation of the algorithm with its published description in the scientific literature.

The key GISTEMP paper is Hansen and Lebedeff 1987 which describes the basic gridding scheme.  
There have been many modifications to the algorithm since then; a review of GISTEMP, Hansen et al 2010, 
documents most of those changes and additions. Further updates are available on the 
website https://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/updates_v3 .

Algorithm

The GISTEMP algorithm is organised as a series of steps.  Data flows through the steps in a pipeline.  
Early steps deal with station records, later steps grid the data before final large area averages are computed.  

Notes:
- Originally only one source was used, so the Step 0 below was void. 
  It may well be that this will be the case again in the future.
- Similarly, Step 1 also became much simpler with the transition to NOAA/NCEI's GHCN v3: 
  The quality control and the combination of records from various sources for the same location is now done 
  by the provider of GHCN v3. What is left is the elimination of a short list of suspected outliers 
  and duplications and has no noticeable impact on the results. 
- In GHCN v3, the various sources for the same location are combined without trying to avoid discontinuities
  in the transitions; instead, these together with other discontinuities are dealt with in the subsequent
  NOAA/NCEI homogenization - hence those homogenized (adj) data are used as basis for the gistemp analysis. 
  The homogenization also ameliorates urbanization effects with the result that the impact and necessity 
  of Step 2 is also diminished.

The steps are:

Step 0: Data are downloaded from websites maintained by the provider of these sources:
        NOAA/NCEI provides the bulk of the data as currently GHCN v3
        SCAR/READER provides reports from stations in and near Antarctica.
        Currently, missing data for the following two stations are filled from reports made available 
        by two individual contributors: Hohenpeissenberg (GHCN v3), Byrd Station (SCAR).
 
Step 1: Under the control of a configuration file, various stations and periods of station records are discarded. 
        The list of these suspected outliers is partially a holdover from applying the QC methods described in 
        Hansen et al 1999 documents, or by a visual inspection of recent anomaly maps and comparing data that 
        seem out of range to the reports of other sources like weather underground. 
        That list also contains stations that are being disregarded, since a more trusted record is available; 
        the SCAR READER/Surface data are the most trusted source, the adjusted GHCN v3 data are next. Data from 
        the other two SCAR sources (automatic weather stations and  CRC/Australian data) are trusted the least.

Step 2: Urban Adjustment.  (Short records are discarded). Stations identified as urban, using values obtained 
        from satellite measurements of nighttime brightness, have their trend adjusted to match the trend of 
        a composite record made from nearby rural stations. At least 2/3 of the adjusted period must have 
        3 rural stations contributing to the composite record.  Periods and stations that do not have sufficient
        support from rural stations are dropped.  The composite rural record is made from rural stations within 500 km, 
        or 1000 km if necessary to meet the above requirement. This step is documented in 
        Hansen et al 1999 (the basic scheme), 
        Hansen et al 2001 (allowing the break point in a two leg fit to vary in time), and 
        Hansen et al 2010 (the use of satellite nightlights).
  
Step 3: Gridding.  A grid of cells is selected (8000 equal area cells covering the globe, see note below), 
        and for each cell a composite series is computed from station records within 1200 km of the cell center.  
        Each contributing record is weighted according to its distance from the cell center, linearly decreasing to 0 
        at a distance of 1200 km.  This step is documented in Hansen and Lebedeff 1987.

Step 4: Sea Surface Temperatures.  Gridded sea surface temperatures are read from a file prepared by GISS using data 
        publicly provided by other sources (currently NOAA/NCEI's ERSST v4) and revised with recent monthly updates.  
        Sea surface temperature data are only used if the location is ice free, data from locations containing sea ice 
        are discarded. This step is documented in Hansen et al 2010.

Step 5: Ocean merging.  Ocean (Sea Surface Temperatures) and Land (Near Surface Air Temperatures) are "merged".  
        A cell that has both ocean and land records selects either the ocean or the land record:
        the land record is discarded unless the ocean record is short or the land record has a contributing 
        land station within 100 km (in which case the ocean record is discarded).  This part is documented in 
        Hansen et al 1996.  In order to produce three analyses for land-only, ocean-only, and combined land-ocean, 
        three maps of cells are produced and go forward to the following Zonal and Global Average steps: 
        one containing only land data, one containing only ocean data, and one containing mixed land and ocean data as described above. 

Zonal Averages.  Each hemisphere is divided into 4 zones by splitting at the latitudes that have sines of 0.4, 0.7, 0.9 (and 0 and 1); 
                 the latitudes of the zone boundaries are approximately 23.6, 44.4, and 64.2 degrees.  
                 For each zone all the cells in that zone are combined into a single record.  
                 Large regional averages (hemispheres, tropics, northern- and southern-extratropics) are computed by combining zones 
                 in various combinations, each zone weighted according to the zone's area.  Zonal averaging is documented in 
                 Hansen and Lebedeff 1987 and Hansen et al 2006 (each of which describes an alternate scheme, the latter is what 
                 is currently implemented, but relictual code exists for the former).

Global Average.  A global series is computed by combining northern- and southern-hemisphere series, weighted equally. 

Annual series are computed from their monthly counterparts. Each month is weighted equally.

Step 6: various visualizations are produced (only some of which we do).


A note on gridding

The grid used (in step 3 and subsequently) divides the globe into 8000 equal area cells.  
It is based on the zonal scheme outlined in Step 5 above.  There are 4 zones per hemisphere, 
and the choice of sines means that the zones have areas in the ratio 4:3:2:1.  
Each zone is divided by longitude into a number of boxes proportional to the area of the zone: 16, 12, 8, 4. 
Thus there are 80 boxes, all having the same area.  
Each box is divided into 100 (10 by 10) cells each having equal area. The 40 cells surrounding the North Pole 
and the 40 cells surrounding the South Pole are treated as single cells (a change introduced on 2016-09-12).


REFERENCES (see: https://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/references.html )

Hansen and Lebedeff 1987 https://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abs/ha00700d.html
Hansen et al 1996 https://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abs/ha04000r.html
Hansen et al 1999 https://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abs/ha03200f.html
Hansen et al 2001 https://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abs/ha02300a.html
Hansen et al 2006 https://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abs/ha07110b.html
Hansen et al 2010 https://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abs/ha00510u.html

HISTORY

2010-11-19 DRJ  Updated Step 1, and fixed reference.
2010-11-19 DRJ  Created (from e-mail).
2016-12-18 Updated by Reto Ruedy
